| [home page](README.md) | [visualizing debt](visualizing-government-debt) | [critique by design](critique-by-design) | [final project I](final-project-part-one) | [final project II](final-project-part-two) | [final project III](final-project-part-three) |

# The Final Data Story

Please view my published website on Shorthand here: [Does school performance change by neighborhood?: A Case Study of Pittsburgh Public Schools](https://carnegiemellon.shorthandstories.com/does-school-performance-change-by-neighborhood/index.html)

# Changes Made Since Part II

**1. Digital Visualizations:**

The biggest changes were to the geographical maps. Previously, I had utilized Datawrapper to create the two maps because I wasn't able to figure out how to render the geographical features on Tableau. However, with help from a peer, I learned how to render the geographical data on Tableau. All of my interviewees had an issue with the initial color scheme of the two maps. Hence, this was the first thing that I wanted to change. I selected a red-green diverging color scheme so that people could more easily understand whether or not the data points were good or bad. Given that the meaning of the bubble sizes changed between the maps (e.g. small being good for chronic absence rates but bad for algebra 1 pass rates), this color change was really helpful. By leveraging the red-green construction for bad-good comparisons, it made it easier for my audience to understand the inconsistencies in the data better as colors didn't match between the two maps. Furthermore, at the recommendation of one of my interviewees, I added in a scatterplot to also illustrate the weak correlation of attendance and performance scores. I think that this was helpful because people were able to see the geographical and trendline patterns. In making this scatterplot, I made sure to make the y-axis "Algebra 1 pass rates" to match the scatterplot that I already had later on in the presentation to compare algebra 1 pass rates and enrollment. Originally, I didn't think that this would matter. But it became apparent with more feedback that people were confused when these two scatterplots had algebra 1 on different axes. So, I made sure to change this before the final submission.
  
A second thing that I changed in my data visualizations was making sure that they would properly display on the shorthand page by fixing them to the right display on Tableau. For instance, some of them needed to be changed to a standard orientation while others needed to be changed to a "fit to width" or "fit to height" orientation. One of my interviewees had described being really upset by one of the charts that wasn't completely displaying on Shorthand. Instead of being able to see it all, you had to scroll to get the full picture, which left some people missing the data completely as they scrolled through Shorthand. Once I found the right orientation for all the charts, they were able to be completely displayed on Shorthand without the need for viewers to scroll.
  
**2. Narrative Tone & Organization:**
The changes to tone and organization were primarily due to narrowing down my audience (discussed below). I wanted to sound more authoritative (instead of exploratory), so that my analysis and recommendations would sound more credible. This change led me to review all of the text and remove any sections where I was over-explaining the steps in my process. I only chose to keep the reasoning behind the variable selection to further solidify the credibility in the analysis conclusions. I did think about removing the part about my story in Los Angeles. However, I kept this aspect because I thought that it would personalize the story a bit more. While I'm not completely confident that it would connect with all district members, I think that it might be impactful as I was a public school student affected by similar issues as their students.

Regarding organization, the biggest thing was adding more transition text. The biggest example was the conclusions section. One of my interviewees had mentioned that they felt like the call-to-action section was too abrupt. Hence, I created the conclusions section to highlight the key takeaways before stating the recommendations. I hope this addition really solidifies the urgency and need to implement these policy recommendations. While the addition of transitional text was most notable in the conclusions section, I also went back and edited headings so that there was a better transition between sections. For instance, I renamed one section "Better Attendance ≠ Better Performance" to tie in the scatterplot that followed the geographical charts. I also retitled a section "East Neighborhood Concerns...Again" to reconnect to an earlier section titled "East Neighborhood Concerns" so that the story re-emphasized the inequities being seen in this area specifically. With these additions, I hope that the story has a smoother flow.

**3. Design Choices:**

Originally, I was utilizing the default Shorthand color scheme. However, I didn't feel that this design choice was intentional and it felt a bit unprofessional. Since I was doing a case study on Pittsburgh, I decided to stick to black and yellow since that was the city's colors. I thought about utilizing the PPS colors, but the webstie seemed a bit too colorful for that style choice to be effective. Upon reviewing my peers' websites, I also appreciated how they utilized a highlight color to emphasize important text or statistics. Hence, I decided to utilize bolded yellow text to highlight the most important pieces of information. Bolded black text was used to highlight information of secondary importance. I felt this tactic was more effective for people who were scrolling through the website quickly without really reading it. One of my interviewees had mentioned that they felt like it was too much text, so I hoped that this would help highlight the most vital information.

Initially, I didn't think too hard about the colors that I utilized in the digitial visualizations. But, once I created the neighborhood map, I realized that it would be helpful to maintain that same neighborhood color scheme throughout the entire presentation. Hence, I made sure that all of the neighborhood lines and data points in my charts matched the neighborhood colors from the map. For instance, North/West neighoborhood data was always a blue line or a blue dot because it was listed as blue in the map. I thought that this would be an effective way to ensure that viewers better understood neighborhood trends. 
  
**4. Recommendations:**

My interviewees seemed to think that my recommendations were good, but they seemed confused by the audience. I think the reason behind the confusion was that policymakers wouldn't necessarily be able to introduce these recommendations. Therefore, I changed my audience to be PPS more specifically. For this reason, I renamed the section to "Next Steps for PPS" instead of "Call-to-Action." Renaming this section also accounted for one of my interviewees' feelings that the sectino title was too dramatic for the situation. Furthermore, I think that this renaming would help people less familiar with the educational scene. While they are not necessarily my audience, it is still important that the material is easily understood by all parties (especially as this information might be relevant for other stakeholders, such as parents or students). One of my interviewees actually had little information about what districts were able to control, and I had to explain that data collection and analysis was a part of their responsibilities. Renaming the section, therefore, should help with that understanding.

Another issue with my recommendations was the lack of clarity. One of my interviees and my Part 2 feedback requested that I add more detail to better describe my recommendations. Hence, I created bullet points and goals to make the recommendations clearer and more actionable. For instance, I listed several specific things that I wanted the equity comparative analysis to investigate, and I listed several resources that could be used for Algebra 1 supports.  

## The Audience

Orginally, my identified audience was policymakers. However, through my interviews, it became apparent that my my audience wasn't very clear. After being told that my intended audience was policymakers, two of my interviewees said that my language/tone was too exploratory and the third interviewee said that this audience was likely misidentified as policymakers at large wouldn't be too knowledgeable about district-level issues. Upon further reflection, I also came to the conlcusion that my recommendations were ill-suited to policymakers in general. Hence, I decided to narrow down my focus to the Pittsburgh Public Schools district specifically. By better identifying my audience, it became more apparent why I was discussing the limitations of the PPS data dashboards. While this conversation wouldn't be necessary for all policymakers, the PPS district would better understand the need to dive deeper into the data; they would be less likely to dismiss this project as a simple recreation of the work they've already done. Furthermore, specifying my audience allowed me to make more actionable recommendations; I was able to give bullet points with specific measures along with the intended goal for each recommendation. This new audience was also more able to actually implement the provided recommendations; policymakers at large would likely be unable to gather this data (due to FERPA laws) and they would be unlikely to provide additional funding (due to jurisdiction limitations in educational laws). Last, as previously mentioned, I altered the tone of the writing to be more authoritative. The previous exploratory tone made it sound more like an academic paper, which didn't suit my purpose. Since I wanted the PPS district to implement my recommendations, I needed to take on a more credible persona. Hence, I removed a lot of the behind-the-scenes process. Instead, I just explained the necessary processes and data trends that were necessary to tie in my recommendations at the end.

## References
To see the references utilized in the making of this project, please refer to the end of my Shorthand website (linked above).

# Final thoughts
While this project serves as a strating point for a comparative equity analysis between PPS' neighborhood schools, there are further key datapoints that future studies should consider:

**Demographics:** There should be a breakdown of demographics by school sites. More specifically, there should be a focus on historically marginalized groups (e.g., race, English Language Learner Status, and Economically Disadvantaged students). At the start of this project, I was hoping to do this work myself, but it was difficult to do so with the public data available on the PPS website. Not all schools had reliable or updated information on all of these categories, which made it difficult to do a true comparison. Additionally, this work would have required a bigger time commitment than I was alotted. I thought about focusing on just two schools: the highest performing and the lowest performing. In this plan, however, I wasn't sure if Algebra 1 pass rates was the best metric to determine performance or if graduation rates should have been considered instead.

**Graduation Rates:** While I utilized Algebra 1 pass rates, I think graduation rates would also be important to look at. While studies have shown a correlation between Algebra 1 pass rates and graduation rates, it's important to understand how strong that correlation is at PPS schools. (As I saw in this study, the correlation between attendance and correlation wasn't as strong as I would have originally assumed. Hence, it's important to not just depend on assumptions and to really look at the data.) It must be noted, however, to ensure that these two metrics are considered along the same graduation cohorts. For instance, I focused on data from the SY 22-23 Grade 9 cohort; however, the data for this cohort's graduation rates wouldn't be available for another 3 years. Hence, it might require PPS to publish more historical data so that these trends can be better studied.
